---
title: The internet as invisible architecture
updated: '2021-04-10'
---

#### This is an early draft and very messy. I wouldn't even bother reading it if I were you.

+ Most people use the internet reflexively, the closest they come to seeing  the complexity of its engineering and governance is when they change the password on their Wifi router, or encounter a DMCA warning page.
+ In reality, internet governance is really complex and heterogenous, and subject to spats and sea changes the whole time.
+ Can it be right that netizens have no understanding of the rules, processes and entities which shape their online experience? Especially as cyber-physical systems dissolve the distinction between online and physical worlds.
+ We've come to regard the internet - specifically the open, silicon valley designed web - as a hallmark of democracy but there are not the same checks and balances; in fact, democratically elected governments have a tough time with the internet as their equities can cut across the values baked into internet architecture by the stakeholders who actually have a voice in internet standards and governance - those values being commerical or anarchic (i.e. decentralised) in nature.
+ The internet is mostly designed by technocracy and its affordances trimmed subsequently by governments. It's a piece of engineering and wouldn't work as it does if it were more Political... but design is always political in some way, shaped by the culture that produces it. If we think about building architecture - Bauhaus, Mughal, Neoclassical, Byzantine, Brutalist - it is obviously shaped by beliefs and values; not simply engineering principles. The same goes for the web.
+ Given we all have to live in the internet, and we value this thing called democracy, with its accountability and transparency, I'd like to explore whether a more visible architecture would change our attitude to the internet as its governance.
+ Democratic governments are beginning a new adoration of the internet - resilient, open, accessible. They want to protect the benefits that the internet brings and the values it stands for, and they want to make sure that if the internet splits, they get the bigger half. Perhaps it is also because the internet is emblematic of international cooperation, permissionless innovation and globalisation and - in the context of rising authoritarian states - demonstrates the fruits of democracy.
+ But democratic governments are also, at the end of the day, accountable to their own people. Is it reasonable, then, to assume that they will match the rhetoric of a global, interconnected internet with global, mutually compatible governance? If we looked internet governance in the face, would we find it ugly and unable to meet political ideals of accountability and inclusivity?